Initial doc for Elytron Security JDBC (#4462)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-jdbc-guide.adoc

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/master/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////

> = Quarkus - Using Security with Jdbc realm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Quarkus - Using Security with a JDBC Realm
```

include::./attributes.adoc[]

This guide demonstrates how your Quarkus application can use a database to store your user identities.

== Prerequisites

To complete this guide, you need:

* less than 15 minutes
* an IDE
* JDK 1.8+ installed with `JAVA_HOME` configured appropriately
* Apache Maven 3.5.3+

== Architecture

In this example, we build a very simple microservice which offers three endpoints:

* `/api/public`
* `/api/users/me`
* `/api/admin`

The `/api/public` endpoint can be accessed anonymously.

> The `/api/admin` endpoint is also protected with RBAC (Role-Based Access Control) where only users granted with the `admin` role can access. At this endpoint, we use the `@RolesAllowed` annotation to declaratively enforce the access constraint.

Reviewer: You say `also` in the second item whereas it doesn't make sense. Either the order is off or `also` should be moved to the third item.

The `/api/users/me` endpoint is protected with RBAC (Role-Based Access Control) where only users granted with the `user` role can access. As a response, it returns a JSON document with details about the user.

== Solution

We recommend that you follow the instructions in the next sections and create the application step by step.
However, you can go right to the completed example.

Clone the Git repository: `git clone {quickstarts-clone-url}`, or download an {quickstarts-archive-url}[archive].

> The solution is located in the `using-elytron-security-jdbc` {quickstarts-tree-url}/using-elytron-security-jdbc[directory].

Reviewer: I want to get rid of the `using-` prefix in the quickstarts so let's not add more of them. Thanks!

== Creating the Maven Project

First, we need a new project. Create a new project with the following command:

[source, subs=attributes+]
----
mvn io.quarkus:quarkus-maven-plugin:{quarkus-version}:create \
    -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \

>     -DprojectArtifactId=using-elytron-security-jdbc \

Reviewer: So this should be adjusted

    -Dextensions="elytron-security-jdbc, jdbc-h2, resteasy"
----

[NOTE]
====

> Don't forget to to add the database connector library of choice. Here we are using H2 as identity store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don't forget to add the database connector library of choice. Here we are using H2 as identity store.
```

====

This command generates a Maven project, importing the `elytron-security-jdbc` extension

> which is an [`wildfly-elytron-realm-jdbc`](https://docs.wildfly.org/17/WildFly_Elytron_Security.html#jdbc-security-realm) adapter for Quarkus applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which is a [`wildfly-elytron-realm-jdbc`](https://docs.wildfly.org/17/WildFly_Elytron_Security.html#jdbc-security-realm) adapter for Quarkus applications.
```
+ you are using a Markdown link, not an Asciidoc one (should be `https://mylink/[my text]`), it won't work well.

== Writing the application

> Let's start by implementing the `/api/public` endpoint. As you can see from the source code below it is just a regular JAX-RS resource:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's start by implementing the `/api/public` endpoint. As you can see from the source code below, it is just a regular JAX-RS resource:
```

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.elytron.security.jdbc;

import javax.annotation.security.PermitAll;
import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

@Path("/api/public")
public class PublicResource {

    @GET
    @PermitAll
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    public String publicResource() {
        return "public";
   }
}
----

The source code for the `/api/admin` endpoint is also very simple. The main difference here is that we are using a `@RolesAllowed` annotation to make sure that only users granted with the `admin` role can access the endpoint:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.elytron.security.jdbc;

import javax.annotation.security.RolesAllowed;
import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

@Path("/api/admin")
public class AdminResource {

    @GET
    @RolesAllowed("admin")
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    public String adminResource() {
         return "admin";
    }
}

> 

Reviewer: Let's drop the empty line.

----

> For last, the `/api/users/me` endpoint. As you can see from the source code below, we are trusting only users with the `user` role.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, let's consider the `/api/users/me` endpoint. As you can see from the source code below, we are trusting only users with the `user` role.
```

We are using `SecurityContext` to get access to the current authenticated Principal and we return the user's name. This information is loaded from the database.

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.elytron.security.jdbc;

import javax.annotation.security.RolesAllowed;
import javax.inject.Inject;
import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.Context;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;
import javax.ws.rs.core.SecurityContext;

@Path("/api/users")
public class UserResource {

    @GET
    @RolesAllowed("user")
    @Path("/me")
    @Produces(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)
    public String me(@Context SecurityContext securityContext) {
        return securityContext.getUserPrincipal().getName();
    }
}
----

=== Configuring the Application

> The `elytron-security-jdbc` extension requires at least one datasource to access to you database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `elytron-security-jdbc` extension requires at least one datasource to access to your database.
```

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.datasource.url=jdbc:h2:mem:using-elytron-security-jdbc;DB_CLOSE_DELAY=-1;DB_CLOSE_DELAY=-1;INIT=RUNSCRIPT FROM 'classpath:import.sql' <1>
quarkus.datasource.driver=org.h2.Driver
quarkus.datasource.username=sa
quarkus.datasource.password=sa
----

> In our context, we are using H2 in-memory mode as identity store and we load `import.sql` to init the database wit users and roles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our context, we are using H2 in-memory mode as identity store and we load `import.sql` to init the database with users and roles.
```

[source,sql]
----
CREATE TABLE test_user (
  id INT,
  username VARCHAR(255),
  password VARCHAR(255),
  role VARCHAR(255)
);

INSERT INTO test_user (id, username, password, role) VALUES (1, 'admin', 'admin', 'admin');
INSERT INTO test_user (id, username, password, role) VALUES (2, 'user','user', 'user');
----

[NOTE]
====

> We're sure you know but we kindly remind that you must not store clear password in production environment ;-)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is probably useless but we kindly remind you that you must not store clear-text passwords in production environment ;-).
```

The `elytron-security-jdbc` offers a built-in bcrypt password mapper.
====

> We can now configure the Elytron Jdbc Realm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can now configure the Elytron JDBC Realm.
```

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.security.jdbc.enabled=true
quarkus.security.jdbc.principal-query.sql=SELECT u.password, u.role FROM test_user u WHERE u.username=? <1>
quarkus.security.jdbc.principal-query.clear-password-mapper.enabled=true <2>
quarkus.security.jdbc.principal-query.clear-password-mapper.password-index=1
quarkus.security.jdbc.principal-query.attribute-mappings.0.index=2 <3>
quarkus.security.jdbc.principal-query.attribute-mappings.0.to=groups
----

> The `elytron-security-jdbc` extension requires at least one principal query to trust and load a user identity.

Reviewer: I don't know what you mean by `to trust`?

> <1> We define a SQL parametrized statement (with exactly 1 parameter) which should return the user's password plus any information your want to load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> We define a parameterized SQL statement (with exactly 1 parameter) which should return the user's password plus any additional information you want to load.
```

<2> We  configure the password mapper with the position of the password field in the `SELECT` fields and other information like salt, hash encoding, etc.
<3> We use `attribute-mappings` to bind the `SELECT` projection fields (ie. `u.role` here) to the target Principal representation attributes.

[NOTE]
====
In the `principal-query` configuration all the `index` properties start at 1 (rather than 0).
====

== Testing the Application

> The application is now protected and the identities is provided by our database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The application is now protected and the identities are provided by our database.
```

> The very first todo is to ensure the anonymous access works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The very first thing to check is to ensure the anonymous access works.
```

> ```bash

Reviewer: This is Markdown, not Asciidoc.

Reviewer: @danielpetisme can you fix that?

$ curl -i -X GET http://localhost:8080/api/public
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Length: 6
Content-Type: text/plain;charset=UTF-8

public%
```

> Now, let's try a to hit a protected resources anonymously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's try a to hit a protected resource anonymously.
```

```bash
$ curl -i -X GET http://localhost:8080/api/admin
HTTP/1.1 401 Unauthorized
Content-Length: 14
Content-Type: text/html;charset=UTF-8

Not authorized%
```

> So far, so good,  now let's try with an allowed user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far so good, now let's try with an allowed user.
```

```bash
$ curl -i -X GET -u admin:admin http://localhost:8080/api/admin
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Length: 5
Content-Type: text/plain;charset=UTF-8

admin%
```

> By providing the `admin:admin` credentials, the extension succeed to authenticate the user and load its roles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By providing the `admin:admin` credentials, the extension authenticated the user and loaded their roles.
```
(let's use the plural form as gender neutral)

The `admin` user is authorized to access to the protected resources.

> The  user the `admin` should be forbid to access a resources protected with `@RolesAllowed("user")` because it hasn't this role.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user `admin` should be forbidden to access a resource protected with `@RolesAllowed("user")` because it doesn't have this role.
```

quarkus.datasource.driver=org.h2.Driver
quarkus.datasource.username=sa
quarkus.datasource.password=sa

quarkus.datasource.permissions.url=jdbc:h2:mem:multiple-data-sources-permissions;DB_CLOSE_DELAY=-1;DB_CLOSE_DELAY=-1;INIT=RUNSCRIPT FROM 'classpath:multiple-data-sources/permissions.sql'
quarkus.datasource.permissions.driver=org.h2.Driver
quarkus.datasource.permissions.username=sa
quarkus.datasource.permissions.password=sa

quarkus.security.jdbc.enabled=true
quarkus.security.jdbc.principal-query.sql=SELECT u.password FROM test_user u WHERE u.username=?
quarkus.security.jdbc.principal-query.clear-password-mapper.enabled=true
quarkus.security.jdbc.principal-query.clear-password-mapper.password-index=1

quarkus.security.jdbc.principal-query.roles.sql=SELECT r.role_name FROM test_role r, test_user_role ur WHERE ur.username=? AND ur.role_id = r.id
quarkus.security.jdbc.principal-query.roles.datasource=permissions
quarkus.security.jdbc.principal-query.roles.attribute-mappings.0.index=1
quarkus.security.jdbc.principal-query.roles.attribute-mappings.0.to=groups
--

> All the configuration options are detailled bellow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the configuration options are detailed below.
```

> 

Reviewer: This table shouldn't be useful. We have automatic doc generation now. The doc explaining how to include it will be published on the website with 0.24.0. I'll point to it.

Author: Do you want me to delete the table or not before the merge ?

Reviewer: I'll point you to the appropriate doc soon :).

Author: Ok I was hoping to have the doc in the 0.24 :/

Reviewer: Well, creating the PR the day of the release doesn't help for that :).

Reviewer: You can find all the relevant information here: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/blob/master/docs/src/main/asciidoc/extension-authors-guide.adoc#32-generating-the-documentation .

The file will be named `quarkus-elytron-security-jdbc.adoc`.

Note that a major change is coming to what we generate but that won't change how you include it so it should be OK for you.

Reviewer: And if you can squash everything when you're done, that will be perfect.

quarkus.security.jdbc.principal-query.attribute-mappings.0.to=groups
----

The `elytron-security-jdbc` extension requires at least one principal query to autenticate the user and its identity.

<1> We define a parameterized SQL statement (with exactly 1 parameter) which should return the user's password plus any additional information you want to load.
<2> We  configure the password mapper with the position of the password field in the `SELECT` fields and other information like salt, hash encoding, etc.
<3> We use `attribute-mappings` to bind the `SELECT` projection fields (ie. `u.role` here) to the target Principal representation attributes.

[NOTE]
====
In the `principal-query` configuration all the `index` properties start at 1 (rather than 0).
====

== Testing the Application

The application is now protected and the identities are provided by our database.
The very first thing to check is to ensure the anonymous access works.

```bash
$ curl -i -X GET http://localhost:8080/api/public
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Length: 6
Content-Type: text/plain;charset=UTF-8

public%
```

Now, let's try a to hit a protected resource anonymously.

> ```bash

Reviewer: And this one too.
